The Project Gutenberg eBook of Velázquez en el museo del Prado, by A. de
Buruete y Moret

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Velázquez en el museo del Prado

Author: A. de Buruete y Moret

Release Date: April 09, 2021 [eBook #65034]

Language: Spanish

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             available at The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VELÁZQUEZ EN EL MUSEO DEL
PRADO ***




                           EL ARTE EN ESPAÑA

                BAJO EL PATRONATO DE LA COMISARÍA REGIA
                    DEL TURISMO Y CULTURA ARTÍSTICA


                               VELAZQUEZ

                         EN EL MUSEO DEL PRADO

             _Cuarenta y ocho ilustraciones con texto de_
                         A. de Beruete y Moret

                            [Illustration]

                          HIJOS DE J. THOMAS

                      c. MALLORCA, 291--BARCELONA


                      RESERVADOS LOS DERECHOS DE
                    PROPIEDAD ARTÍSTICA Y LITERARIA




[Illustration] VELÁZQUEZ


El desarrollo progresivo del arte español en los tiempos de Felipe II,
debido en parte a las influencias de artistas extranjeros aportadas por
las relaciones personales y preferencias de aquel significado monarca,
ayudaron poderosamente al brillante apogeo pictórico del siglo XVII.
Pero entre aquel período que pudiera denominarse de gestación aun
indefinida y borrosa, al del florecimiento nacional castizo, mediaron
algunos años, los últimos del siglo XVI y los primeros de la centuria
siguiente, que fueron poco afortunados para nuestra pintura. Degenerada
la escuela de los retratistas, muerto El Greco, aislada gran parte de su
producción en Toledo, sin una sola personalidad pictórica las ciudades
más notables y la Corte sin pintores de valía, no era fácil predecir que
el momento brillante estaba tan próximo ni que iba a ser tan rico, tan
extenso y tan vario.

Por aquellos días tristes para la pintura española empezaba su educación
artística un joven, casi un niño, que había nacido en Sevilla en 6 de
Junio de 1599: Diego Rodríguez de Silva y Velázquez.

Desde la temprana edad de once años fué alumno de Francisco Pacheco,
aquel cultísimo pintor a cuya casa acudía lo más selecto en Letras y
Artes de la ciudad andaluza. Las enseñanzas de Pacheco, sus máximas
artísticas, trasnochado trasunto del pseudo-clasicismo imperante a la
sazón, no consiguieron torcer el temperamento y las inclinaciones de su
joven alumno, enderezadas al culto de la interpretación fiel del
natural. Nada de convencionalismos de escuela, nada de embellecer la
forma ruda que a menudo presenta el modelo vivo a los ojos de un
espíritu que anhela un ideal superior. Copiarlo tal y cómo a su vista se
presentaba, sin atenuaciones ni falseamientos, fué su eterno propósito,
al cual se mantuvo fiel, ayudado por su temperamento reposado y sereno y
por el más perfecto órgano visual. Multitud de estudios seriamente
realizados, ya al lápiz, ya en color, fueron sus primeros ensayos. Aun
adolescente, ejecutó alguna de aquellas obras que asombran por su
realismo, por su magistral dibujo (cualidad que le fue ingénita), por su
relieve escultural, por su sobriedad, _La vieja friendo huevos_, de la
colección Cook, y _El aguador de Sevilla_, perteneciente al Duque de
Wellington, ambos cuadros en Inglaterra, nos demuestran la forma y
resolución que daba el artista en aquellos años a estas obras de
carácter popular, a juzgar por su asunto y modelos. En cuanto a las
obras de carácter religioso, pueden servir de tipo _La Inmaculada
Concepción_, _San Juan en Patmos_, _Cristo en casa de Marta_, todas tres
en Inglaterra como las anteriores; _San Pedro_, en una colección
particular de Madrid; _La Adoración de los Reyes_, en el Museo del
Prado, y _Cristo y los peregrinos de Emaus_, que ha sido adquirido
recientemente en los Estados Unidos.

Aun cuando el arte que revelan estos cuadros y todos los demás que por
aquellos años, aun de aprendizaje, pintara en Sevilla, no son sino lo
opuesto a las máximas preconizadas por Pacheco, éste, lejos de torcer
una manifestación tan patente, alentó las tendencias a la realización de
una pintura tan francamente naturalista que realizaba su discípulo, y,
cautivado por las cualidades morales que demostraba, le hizo su yerno
antes de cumplir los diez y nueve años. Algo después, tras una tentativa
infructuosa hecha en 1622, consiguió Pacheco, en 1623, la introducción
de Velázquez en la Corte del rey Felipe IV, de cuyo servicio no se había
de separar durante el transcurso de su vida.

Del asombro que produjo en la Corte el retrato de Fonseca, el primero
que hizo el joven sevillano, como ensayo de su capacidad, da testimonio
el hecho de que al verlo el Rey, sus hermanos los Infantes y los nobles,
Velázquez fué agraciado con puesto y sueldo en Palacio y encargado de
pintar sin dilación la efigie del Soberano.

Perdido el retrato de Fonseca, existen varios del Monarca, del Infante
D. Carlos, del Conde-Duque de Olivares, pintados en aquellos primeros
años de Velázquez en Madrid, obras maestras, tan personales, que bastan
a explicar la rivalidad que despertara aquel joven intruso entre los
pintores adocenados de Felipe IV. Su posición, sin embargo, se afianzó
de día en día, no contribuyendo poco a esto el triunfo obtenido en 1625
con un retrato ecuestre del Monarca, hoy desaparecido, y el premio que
le fué acordado por el lienzo _La Expulsión de los Moriscos_, para el
cual fué abierto un concurso en competencia con otros tres pintores del
Rey, Vicente Carducho, Eugenio Caxes y Angel Nardi. Obtuvo Velázquez la
palma que le concedió por unanimidad un Jurado compuesto de artistas.
Perdido también este lienzo en el incendio del Alcázar de 1734, queda
otro, _Los Borrachos_, terminado dos años después, síntesis suprema de
cuanto hasta aquella fecha produjera. Muestra este lienzo las cualidades
todas de aquellas obras ejecutadas en Sevilla en sus primeros años de
aprendizaje, pero en un grado muy superior. Nunca ha tenido la picaresca
española, que hace un papel tan brillante en la literatura de aquellos
días, más genuina representación que la que ostenta este lienzo
prodigioso. En él se reveló el artista con un vigor no superado después
en la caracterización de tipos y en la fuerza de expresión. Si Velázquez
hubiera muerto luego de pintado el cuadro de _Los Borrachos_, bastara
esta sola obra para darle la supremacía y el título de creador de una
escuela indefinida hasta entonces por falta de orientación fija y
personal.

Y sin embargo, aquellos comienzos tan brillantes en la Corte no fueron
sino pálidos anuncios y tenues vislumbres del asombroso florecimiento
que había de alcanzar más adelante.

Su primer viaje a Italia, en el año de 1629, que fué en el que terminó
_Los Borrachos_, marca un progreso en el perfeccionamiento de sus
cualidades nativas tan desarrolladas por el estudio de los grandes
maestros italianos y por su constante afán de realizar una
interpretación sobria y siempre fiel del natural.

En aquellos países y por aquellos años, en el ambiente clásico, produjo
_La Fragua de Vulcano_, obra mitológica en la que, si no demostró un
saber profundo acerca de los cánones clásicos, dejó bien patente su
maestría en la resolución del desnudo. Asimismo y entre otras obras,
pintó entonces los dos paisajes de la Villa Médicis, en Roma, donde
mostró, no obstante la sencillez de estas obras, la manera cómo él
comprendía y trataba el paisaje. En este respecto se le ha considerado
como un precursor de la forma en que las modernas escuelas han entendido
la resolución de la pintura al aire libre.

Desde 1631, en que regresó de Italia, hasta 1649, en que emprendió su
segundo viaje, se halla comprendido el período de la más variada y
asombrosa producción del artista, no por lo fecundo, que Velázquez no lo
fué nunca en cuanto al número de las obras de su pincel, aunque sí por
lo selecto de esas obras.

El cuadro de _Las Lanzas_, de sin igual nobleza, obra representativa del
genio pictórico de una raza hidalga; los retratos ecuestres de Reyes y
Príncipes; aquellos otros en que estos mismos personajes aparecen
vestidos de cazadores, en los que se sirvió para fondo de diferentes
paisajes del monte del Pardo, que con sus seculares encinas, plantadas
en un terreno rico en accidentes, pero pobre de suelo, se ve limitado en
el horizonte por la cadena de montañas de la sierra de Guadarrama, donde
brillan al sol de Castilla sus altas cumbres casi siempre cubiertas de
nieve; otros retratos como el del Conde Duque de Olivares; el del Rey
en traje militar, pintado en Fraga en 1644 y descubierto el año pasado;
los de algunos bufones de la Corte; el de mujer española, tan típico en
su clase, que atesora la colección Wallace; el Cristo en la cruz; las
escenas de caza, son obras que bastan para dar idea del crecimiento que
adquiere el pintor durante ese período, acentuando su personalidad
potente. Durante estos diez y ocho años de su edad madura desenvuelve lo
que la crítica ha denominado su segunda manera, más amplia y grandiosa
que la de su juventud, más colorista cada día, enriqueciendo todas las
obras que salían de sus pinceles con aquellas finas armonías grises, a
veces plateadas, tan características y tan inconfundibles.

Pero aun guardaba bríos para crear un arte superior, quizá enigmático de
puro sencillo, que se muestra en todas las obras de la última década de
su vida, arte tan sublime que empezó no ha mucho a ser comprendido y que
hoy está dando sus mejores frutos.

Desde que en 1650 Velázquez pintó en Roma el retrato del Papa Doria,
precedido del busto de Juan Pareja, de Longford Castle, y del estudio
para dicho retrato del Papa que se guarda en San Petersburgo, en el
Museo del Ermitage, hasta la muerte del artista en Agosto de 1660,
Velázquez, alto funcionario de la Corte ocupado en comisiones de obras
de los Alcázares y Palacios Reales, tarea completamente ajena al
ejercicio del arte y que contribuyó no poco a mermar su producción,
robó, no obstante, a tan múltiples y enojosas tareas el tiempo
suficiente para crear obras como los últimos retratos de los Reyes y de
los Príncipes que admiramos en Madrid, Viena, Londres y París; la
segunda serie de los enanos de la Corte, más asombrosa aun y más rica
que la pintada en los años medios, en la cual deben ser colocadas las
dos características figuras de _Esopo_ y _Menipo_, que nada de griegos
tienen, pero que son en esta última época de la vida del pintor lo que
fueron en la primera el lienzo de _Los Borrachos_, los dos cuadros
religiosos de _La Coronación de la Virgen_ y _Los Santos Ermitaños_, los
seis mitológicos, tres de ellos perdidos en el incendio del Alcázar en
1734, pero de los que afortunadamente conservamos en nuestro Museo
Nacional _El Dios Marte_ y _Mercurio y Argos_, y la _Venus del Espejo_,
que posee la Galería Nacional de Londres, y la originalidad del cual ha
sido tan injustamente discutida; y, por último, los lienzos capitales
_Las Hilanderas_ y _Las Meninas_, monumentos supremos de toda una
escuela pictórica, modelos de arte sintético, de asombrosa sencillez en
su factura, de armonías deliciosas y de estudios de valores, trozos, en
fin, de pintura sublime que, bajo una modesta apariencia, nada
aparatosa, son, no obstante, obras mágicas creadas espontáneamente, sin
que en parte alguna de ellas revelen ni esfuerzo, ni debilidad, ni
fatiga.

Tal fué el genio que tanta gloria ha dado a España y que con sólo un
centenar de obras ha ejercido la más poderosa influencia en casi todas
las escuelas contemporáneas.

                                                  A. DE BERUETE Y MORET

Los números que van al pié de las láminas corresponden a los del
catálogo oficial del Museo del Prado.




[Illustration] VELAZQUEZ

_Traduit par M. Emile Bertaux, Correspondant de l’Académie Royale de
Saint Ferdinand et Professeur à l’Université de Paris_


Le développement progressif de l’art espagnol à l’époque de Philippe II,
qui avait été dû en partie à l’influence d’artistes étrangers groupés
par les relations personnelles et les préférences d’un monarque dont la
personnalité fut dominatrice, contribua puissament à l’éclat de la
peinture qui atteint son apogée pendant le XVIIᵉ siècle. Cependant la
période de gestation encore mal définie et confuse qui précède la
floraison d’un art purement national en est séparée par quelques années,
les dernières du XVIᵉ siècle et les premières du siècle suivant, qui
furent peu heureuses pour notre peinture. La décadence de l’école des
portraitistes, la mort du Greco, dont l’œuvre presque entière demeurait
isolée à Tolède, l’absence d’une personnalité artistique dans les villes
les plus importantes et d’un peintre de valeur à la Cour ne laissaient
guère prévoir que l’époque brillante fut si proche pour l’art, ni
qu’elle dut être si riche, si prolongée et si variée dans ses
manifestations.

C’est dans ces jours tristes pour la peinture espagnole qu’un jeune
homme, né à Séville le 6 Juin 1599, commençait son éducation artistique:
il s’appelait Diego Rodríguez de Silva y Velázquez.

Dès l’âge de onze ans il fut élève de Francisco Pacheco, ce peintre
d’esprit très cultivé qui attirait dans sa maison tout ce qui formait
dans la capitale andaleuse l’élite des lettres et des arts. Les
enseignements de Pacheco, ses maximes artistiques, résumés du
pseudo-classicisme qui était de mode alors, n’arrivèrent pas à détourner
le tempérament et les tendances du jeune homme, qui se consacrait déjà a
l’interprétation fidèle de la nature. Point de conventions d’école;
point d’embellissements de la forme brute que le modèle vivant offre à
la vue d’un esprit qui souvent aspire à un idéal supérieur. Copier la
nature, telle qu’elle se présentait à ses yeux, sans atténuations ni
falsifications, tel fut toujours le principe auquel il demeura fidèle et
qu’il put observer grâce à la froideur sereine de son tempérament
d’artiste et à la perfection unique de son organe visuel. Ses premiers
essais furent de nombreuses études très sérieusement exécutées au moyen
du crayon ou de la couleur. Encore adolescent il peignit quelques unes
de ces œuvres si étonnantes par le réalisme, par le dessin magistral
(que Velázquez posséda comme un don inné), par le relief sculptural et
la sobriété: la _Vieille femme faisant frire des œufs_ (de la collection
Cook) et le _Porteur d’eau de Séville_ (appartenant au duc de
Wellington). Ces deux tableaux d’Angleterre nous montrent la vigueur que
l’artiste donnait dès lors à ces œuvres de caractère populaire par le
sujet et les modèles. Quant aux œuvres de caractère religieux, on peut
citer comme types l’_Immaculée Conception_, _Saint Jean à Pathmos_, le
_Christ dans la maison de Marthe_, trois tableaux qui, comme les
précédents, sont conservés en Angleterre; un _Saint Pierre_, dans une
collection particulière de Madrid; l’_Adoration des Mages_, au Musée du
Prado, et le _Christ avec les pélerins d’Emmaüs_, qui a été récemment
acquis par un collectionneur des Etats Unis.

L’art que révèlent ces tableaux et les autres que Velázquez peignit à
Séville dans ces années d’apprentissage se trouvait en contradiction
avec les maximes professées par Pacheco; pourtant celui-ci, bien loin de
chercher à détourner son disciple de la vocation qu’il manifestait,
l’encouragea à réaliser une peinture franchement naturaliste, et séduit
par les qualités morales de Velázquez, il fit de lui son gendre, avant
que le jeune peintre eût accompli sa dix-neuvième année. Un peu plus
tard Pacheco, après avoir fait en 1622 une première tentative qui resta
infructueuse, parvint en 1623 à introduire Velázquez à la cour du roi
Philippe IV: le peintre devait rester toute sa vie attaché au service de
son souverain.

Le portrait de Fonseca, le premier que le jeune Sévillan peignit à la
Cour, mit à l’épreuve son talent d’une manière si éclatante que lorsque
ce portrait eut été montré au Roi, aux Infants ses frères et aux
courtisans, Velázquez obtint une place et un traitement au Palais et fut
chargé de peindre sans délai l’effigie du souverain.

Le portrait de Fonseca est perdu; mais il existe divers portraits du
Roi, de l’Infant D. Carlos, du Comte-Duc d’Olivares, qui ont été peints
dans les premières années que Velázquez passa à Madrid. Ce sont des
œuvres magistrales et si personnelles qu’elles suffisent à expliquer la
jalousie que le jeune intrus éveilla dans le groupe médiocre des
peintres de Philippe IV. Cependant la position de Velázquez se consolida
de jour en jour, et particulièrement après le triomphe qu’il obtint en
1626 avec un portrait équestre du roi, qui a disparu et après sa
victoire dans le concours institué pour le tableau de l’Expulsion des
Morisques. Dans ce concours, où il se recontrait avec trois autres
peintres du roi, Vicente Carducho, Eugenio Caxes et Angel Nardi,
Velázquez remporta la palme à l’unanimité d’un jury composé d’artistes.
Ce tableau a péri, lui aussi, dans l’incendie de l’Alcázar de Madrid en
1734. Il en reste un autre, les _Buveurs_, terminé deux ans plus tard,
et qui se présente comme la synthèse suprême de tout ce que Velázquez a
produit à cette époque. Ce tableau montre toutes les qualités des œuvres
exécutées à Séville dans les premières années d’apprentissage, mais à un
degré très supérieur. Nulle part l’esprit picaresque, qui joua un rôle
si brillant dans la littérature espagnole de ce temps, n’a trouvé une
expression plus originale que dans cette toile prodigieuse. L’artiste
s’y révèle avec une vigueur qui n’a pas été surpassée pour la
caractéristique des types et l’énergie de l’expression. Si Velázquez
était mort au lendemain des _Borrachos_, cette œuvre seule suffirait à
lui assurer la suprématie et le titre de créateur d’école dans un milieu
qui manquait encore d’orientation fixe et de personnalité.

Ces commencements de Velázquez à la Cour, si brillants qu’ils fussent,
laissaient à peine prévoir le prodigieux éclat que devait atteindre le
génie de l’artiste. Son premier voyage en Italie, qui eut lieu dans
l’année même où il termina le tableau des Buveurs, en 1629, marque un
perfectionnement de ses qualités naturelles, qui se développent par
l’étude des grands maîtres italiens et par la volonté constante de
réaliser une interprétation plus sobre et plus fidèle de la nature.
C’est alors, en Italie et dans le milieu classique, qu’il peint la Forge
de Vulcain, œuvre mythologique qui, si elle ne montre pas une
connaissance bien sérieuse des canons consacrés, révèle toute la
maîtrise du peintre dans l’exécution du nu. C’est alors encore que
Velázquez peint les deux paysages de la Villa Médicis, à Rome, où il
montra, dans de simples études, comment il comprenait et traitait le
paysage, en précurseur des écoles modernes et de la peinture de plein
air.

Entre l’année 1631, qui est celle de son retour d’Italie, et l’année
1649, qui est celle de son second voyage à Rome, s’ouvre la période où
la production de l’artiste est la plus étonnante, non pour la fécondité,
que Velázquez ne connut jamais, mais pour la variété et le raffinement
des œuvres.

Le tableau des Lances, de noblesse sans égale, où le génie du peintre
rend visible tout l’esprit chevaleresque de la race; les portraits
équestres du Roi, de la Reine et des princes; les autres toiles, où les
mêmes personnages se montrent vêtus en chasseurs, et qui ont pour fonds
les paysages montagneux du Pardo, avec leurs chênes séculaires, plantés
dans un terrain dont les formes sont aussi richement accidentées que le
sol est pauvre, ces paysages dont l’horizon est limité par la chaîne de
la Sierra de Guadarrama et par ses sommets neigeux qui brillent au
soleil de la Castille; d’autres portraits encore, comme celui du
Comte-Duc d’Olivares, celui du Roi en costume militaire, peint à Fraga
en 1644 et découvert en 1912; ceux des bouffons de la cour; celui d’une
femme espagnole, si typique entre tous les portraits du même genre, et
qui est l’un des trésors de la collection Wallace; le Christ en croix;
les scènes de chasses; ce sont autant d’œuvres qui donnent une idée de
la puissance qu’acquiert alors la personnalité du peintre. Pendant ces
dix huit ans de sa maturité se développe ce que la critique a appelé la
seconde manière de Velazquez, plus ample que elle de sa jeunesse, de
plus en plus colorée et enrichie de ces fines harmonies grises ou
argentées auquel rien ne peut être comparé.

Il restait encore cependant au peintre des forces pour créer un art
supérieur, presque énigmatique, qui se révèle dans les œuvres de la
dernière décade de sa vie, art si sublime qu’il n’a été compris que
depuis peu et qu’il trouve peut-être aujourd’hui ses meilleurs
disciples.

Après avoir peint à Rome en 1650 le portrait du _pape Doria_, précédé du
buste de _Juan Pareja_ (aujourd’hui à Longford Castle) et de l’étude
pour le portrait du pape qui est conservée à Saint-Pétersbourg, au Musée
de l’Ermitage, Velázquez devient l’un des plus hauts fonctionnaires de
la Cour d’Espagne. Il présida jusqu’à sa mort, au mois d’août 1660, aux
travaux des Palais Royaux. Ces fonctions officielles, complètement
étrangères à l’exercice de son art, contribuèrent beaucoup à
restreindre la production de l’artiste. Cependant il trouva moyen de
prendre sur ses occupations multiples et fastidieuses le temps de créer
des œuvres comme les derniers portraits des Rois et des Princes que nous
admirons à Madrid; la seconde série des nains de la cour, plus riche
encore et plus étonnante que celle qu’il avait peinte au milieu de sa
vie, et dans laquelle il faut placer les deux figures caractéristiques
d’_Esope_ et de _Ménippe_, qui n’ont rien de grec et qui sont dans cette
dernière époque de la vie du peintre ce qu’avait été dans la première
les tableaux des Buveurs; les deux tableaux religieux du _Couronnement
de la Vierge_ et des _Saints Ermites_; les six toiles mythologiques,
dont trois ont péri dans l’incendie de l’Alcazar en 1734, mais dont il
reste heureusement, dans notre Musée national, le _Dieu Mars_ et
_Mercure avec Argue_, et, dans la Galerie nationale de Londres, la
_Vénus au miroir_, dont l’authenticité a été discutée bien à tort;
enfin, les toiles capitales des _Fileuses_ et des _Ménines_, monuments
suprêmes de toute une école, modèles d’art synthétique, merveilleux pour
la simplicité de la facture, la délicatesse des harmonies et l’étude des
valeurs, morceaux de peinture, qui, sous une apparence modeste et sans
nul apparat, sont des œuvres magiques et des créations sublimes, dans
lesquelles le peintre ne trahit ni effort, ni faiblesse, ni fatigue. Tel
fut le génie qui a donné tant de gloire à l’Espagne et qui, avec une
centaine d’œuvres, à peine, a exercé l’influence la plus puissante sur
presque toutes les écoles contemporaines.

                                                 A. DE BERUETE Y MORET.

Les numéros qui figurent aux pieds des gravures, correspondent aux ceux
du Catalogue officiel du Museo del Prado.




[Illustration] VELAZQUEZ


The development of Spanish art in the time of Philip II which was partly
due to the influence of foreign artists brought together by that
distinguished monarch’s personal relations and preferences, contributed
greatly to the glory of painting, which reached its zenith in the
seventeenth century. But the period of gestation as yet ill defined and
confused, which precedes the blossoming of a purely national art, is
separated from it by several years; the last of the sixteenth century
and the first of the following century were not the happiest for our
painting. The decay of the school of the portrait painters, the death of
El Greco, whose work remained almost entirely confined to Toledo, the
absence of any artistic personality in the largest towns, or of a
painter of any talent at court, hardly encouraged men to prophecy that
the golden age of art was at hand, or that it was to be so rich, so
prolonged or so various in its manifestations.

It was in these melancholy days for Spanish painting that a young man,
born in Seville in 1699, began his artistic education. His name was
Diego Rodríguez de Silva y Velázquez.

From eleven years of age he had been the pupil of Francisco Pacheco, the
painter whose highly trained intelligence attracted all those who
formed, in the Andalusian capital, the aristocracy of art and letters.

The teaching of Pacheco, his artistic maxims, crystallised from the
pseudo-classicism which was then fashionable, made no impression on the
temperament and natural tendencies of the young man, who had already
devoted himself to the faithful interpretation of nature. No conventions
of the studios; no embellishment of the rude form which the living model
offers to the vision of a soul that often aspires to some higher ideal;
to follow nature as she reveals herself to his eyes, without
conventionalising or falsifying, such was the principle to which he
always remained faithful, and which he was able to observe, thanks to
the serene aloofness of his artistic temperament and the marvellous
correctness of his eye. His first attempts were numerous crayon and
colour studies executed with great seriousness. While still in his teens
he painted several of those works so remarkable for their realism, for
their masterly drawing (which with Velázquez was an innate gift), for
their sculptural relief and precision: the Old Woman Frying Eggs (of the
Cook collection) and the Seville Water-Carrier (in the possession of the
Duke of Wellington). Both these pictures, now in England, show that
vigour with which the artist treated popular subjects. Typical of his
religious works are the Immaculate Conception, St. John in Patmos,
Christ in the House of Martha, all three, like the preceding ones, in
England; St. Peter, in a private collection at Madrid; the Adoration of
the Magi in the Prado; and Christ with the Pilgrims of Emmaus, which has
been recently acquired by an American collector.

The art revealed by these pictures and the others which Velázquez
painted at Seville in his years of apprenticeship, are in direct
contradiction with the principles professed by Pacheco. Yet, far from
seeking to dissuade his pupil from following the tendencies he
manifested, he encouraged him to realise a style of painting frankly
naturalistic; and, won by the moral qualities of Velázquez, made him his
son-in-law before the young painter had completed his nineteenth year. A
little later, Pacheco, after having made in 1622 an unsuccessful
attempt, succeeded in 1623 in introducing Velázquez to the court of
Philip IV. The painter remained his whole life in the service of his
sovereign.

The portrait of Fonseca, the first which the young Sevillian painted at
the Court, put his talent to the proof in a manner so brilliant that
when this portrait had been shown to the King, to his brothers the
Infantes and to the courtiers, Velázquez obtained a salaried position at
Court and was at once commissioned to paint the portrait of the
sovereign.

Fonseca’s portrait is lost, but there are in existence several portraits
of the King, the Infante D. Carlos, the Count-Duke Olivares, painted in
the first years spent by Velázquez in Madrid. These are masterly works
and so personal that they are sufficient to explain the jealousy which
the young intruder aroused in the mediocre group of painters around
Philip IV. Nevertheless the position of Velázquez grew stronger from day
to day, and particularly after his triumph in 1625 with an equestrian
portrait of the King which has disappeared, and his victory in the
competition for a picture showing the expulsion of the Moors. Here he
was matched against three of the King’s other painters, Vincente
Carducho, Eugenio Caxes and Angel Nardi. Velázquez obtained the prize by
the unanimous decision of a jury composed of artists. This painting was
also lost in the burning of the Alcazar at Madrid in 1734. There remains
another, The Topers, finished two years later, the high water mark of
Velázquez’s production during these years. This picture shows all the
qualities of the works executed at Seville in the first years of
apprenticeship, but in a higher degree. Nowhere has the picaresque
spirit which played so brilliant a part in Spanish literature at that
time, found a more original expression than on this extraordinary
canvas. The artist here reveals himself with a vigour that has not been
surpassed for characterization of types and energy of expression. If
Velázquez had died the day after finishing The Topers, this work alone
would have been enough to ensure his supremacy and to give him the title
of founder of a school in a milieu still lacking in definite orientation
and in personality.

These brilliant beginnings of Velázquez at Court dimly foreshadowed the
glory which awaited him. His first travels in Italy which took place the
year that he finished the painting of The Topers, in 1629, marks a
perfecting of his natural qualities, which develop by the study of the
great Italian masters and by the constant determination to realize an
interpretation more precise and more faithful to nature.

It was then in Italy and in classical surroundings that he painted
Vulcan’s Forge, a mythological work, which if it does not show a very
close acquaintance with the consecrated canons, reveals all the mastery
of the artist in the execution of the nude. Then also it was that
Velázquez painted the two landscapes of the Villa Medici at Rome, where
he showed in simple studies how he understood and treated landscape, as
the forerunner of the modern schools of open-air painting.

Between the year 1631, the date of his return from Italy, and the year
1649 the date of his second journey to Rome, begins the period during
which the artist’s production is most marvellous, not for copiousness
which never characterised Velázquez, but for the variety and refinement
of his works.

The painting of The Lances unequalled for nobility, where the painter’s
genius reproduces all the chivalrous spirit of the race; the equestrian
portraits of the King, Queen and princes; the other canvases where the
same personages are seen dressed for the chase, and which have as
background the mountainous country of the Pardo with its ancient oaks
planted in a soil as picturesque as it is poor--these landscapes, the
horizon of which is bounded by the range of the Sierra de Guadarrama,
and by the snowy summits of Castile glittering in the sun; and other
portraits also like that of the Count-Duke Olivares; that of the King
in military uniform painted at Fraga in 1644 and discovered in 1912;
those of the court jesters; that of a Spanish woman, typical of its
class, which is one of the treasures of the Wallace collection; Christ
on the Cross; the scenes of the chase; all works which give an idea of
the power which the painter’s personality acquired. During these
eighteen years of maturity developed what the critics call the second
manner of Velázquez, larger than that of his youth, even more finely
coloured and enriched with those harmonies in grey and silver with which
nothing else can compare.

But the painter still retained sufficient vitality to create a higher
art, almost enigmatical, which is shown in the works of his last decade,
an art so sublime that it has only recently been understood, and which
finds perhaps its best disciples among the moderns.

After having painted at Rome in 1650 the portrait of the Doria Pope,
preceded by the bust of Juan Pareja now at Longford Castle, and the
study for the portrait of the Pope which is preserved in St. Petersburg
at the Hermitage, Velázquez became one of the highest functionaries of
the Spanish Court. Up to his death in the month of August 1660 he
superintended the decoration of the Royal Palace. His official duties,
which were quite foreign to the exercise of his art contributed greatly
to limit the output of the painter. However he found means to take from
his numerous and exacting occupations the time to create works such as
the last portraits of the Kings and the Princes which we admire so much
at Madrid; the second series of dwarfs, richer still and more
marvellous than those that he had painted in his maturity and among
which we must place the two characteristic figures of Aesop and Menippus
which have nothing of the Greek and are in the last epoch of the
painter’s life, what the painting of the Drunkards had been in the
earlier; the two religious paintings of the Crowning of the Virgin and
the Holy Hermits; the six mythological canvases, three of which perished
in the burning of the Alcazar in 1734, but some of which happily remain
in our national Museum, the Gods Mars and Mercury with Argus, and, in
the National Gallery in London, the Venus with the Looking-glass, the
attribution of which has been wrongly doubted; and finally the fine
canvases of the Spinners and the Meninas the supreme monuments of a
whole school, models of synthetic art, marvellous for the simplicity of
their technique, the delicacy of their harmonies, and the study of
values, paintings which, in spite of their modest appearance and lack of
elaboration, are works of magic and sublime creations in which the
painter betrays neither effort, weakness or fatigue.

Such was the genius who has conferred so much glory on Spain and who,
with barely a hundred canvases, has exercised the most powerful
influence over nearly all modern schools of painting.

                                                 A. DE BERUETE Y MORET.

The numbers at the foot of the illustrations, correspond to those in the
official catalogue of the Prado Museum.

[Illustration: LA ADORACIÓN DE LOS REYE

L’ADORATION DES MAGES

THE ADORATION OF THE MAGIS

[1166]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE HOMBRE

PORTRAIT D’HOMME

PORTRAIT OF A MAN

[1209]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE FELIPE IV.

PORTRAIT DE PHILIPPE IV

PORTRAIT OF PHILIP IV

[1182]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE D.ª JUANA PACHECO, MUJER DEL PAINTER

PORTRAIT DE D.ª JUANA PACHECO, FEMME DU PEINTRE

PORTRAIT OF JOANNA PACHECO, WIFE OF THE PAINTER

[1197]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DEL INFANTE D. CARLOS

PORTRAIT DE L’INFANT DON CARLOS

PORTRAIT OF THE INFANTE CHARLES

[1188]]

[Illustration: REUNIÓN DE BEBEDORES (LOS BORRACHOS)

RÉUNION DE BUVEURS (LES IVROGNES)

THE WINE BIBBERS

[1170]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE FELIPE IV

PORTRAIT DE PHILIPPE IV

PORTRAIT OF PHILIP IV

[1183]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE LA INFANTA DE ESPAÑA D.ª MARIA, REINA DE
HUNGRÍA

PORTRAIT DE L’INFANTE D’ESPAGNE D.ª MARIA, REINE DE HONGRIE

PORTRAIT OF THE INFANTA MARIA OF SPAIN, QUEEN OF HUNGARY

[1187]]

[Illustration: LA FRAGUA DE VULCANO

LA FORGE DE VULCAIN

THE FORGE OF VULCAN

[1171]]

[Illustration: VISTA TOMADA EN EL JARDÍN DE LA «VILLA MÉDICI», EN ROMA

VUE PRISE DANS LE JARDIN DE LA «VILLA MÉDICI», À ROME

VIEW TAKEN IN THE GARDEN OF THE «VILLA MÉDICI», AT ROME

[1210]]

[Illustration: VISTA TOMADA EN EL JARDÍN DE LA «VILLA MÉDICI», EN ROMA

VUE PRISE DANS LE JARDIN DE LA «VILLA MÉDICI», À ROME

VIEW TAKEN IN THE GARDEN OF THE «VILLA MÉDICI», AT ROME

[1211]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE UN BUFÓN DEL REY FELIPE IV, LLAMADO «PABLILLOS
DE VALLADOLID»

PORTRAIT D’UN BOUFFON DU ROI PHILIPPE IV «PABLILLOS DE VALLADOLID»

PORTRAIT OF ONE OF THE BUFFOONS OF PHILIP IV, NAMED «PABLILLOS DE
VALLADOLID»

[1198]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE D. DIEGO DE CORRAL Y ARELLANO

PORTRAIT DE D. DIEGO DE CORRAL Y ARELLANO

PORTRAIT OF DIEGO DE CORRAL Y ARELLANO

[1195]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE D.ª ANTONIA IPEÑARRIETA Y GALDÓS

PORTRAIT DE D.ª ANTONIA IPEÑARRIETA Y GALDÓS

PORTRAIT OF ANTONIA IPEÑARRIETA Y GALDÓS

[1196]]

[Illustration: NUESTRO SEÑOR CRUCIFICADO

LE CHRIST EN CROIX

OUR LORD CRUCIFIED

[1167]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE D. ANTONIO ALONSO PIMENTEL

PORTRAIT DE D. ANTONIO ALONSO PIMENTEL

PORTRAIT OF ANTHONY ALONSO PIMENTEL

[1193]]

[Illustration: LA RENDICIÓN DE BREDA (LAS LANZAS)

LA REDDITION DE BREDA (LES LANCES)

CAPITULATION OF BREDA (THE LANCES)

[1172]]

[Illustration: LA RENDICIÓN DE BREDA (LAS LANZAS) (FRAGMENTO)

LA REDDITION DE BREDA (LES LANCES) (FRAGMENT)

CAPITULATION OF BREDA (THE LANCES) (FRAGMENT)

[1172]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DEL CÉLEBRE ESCULTOR MARTÍNEZ MONTÁÑEZ

PORTRAIT DU SCULPTEUR CÉLÈBRE MARTÍNEZ MONTÁÑEZ

PORTRAIT OF THE EMINENT SCULPTOR MARTÍNEZ MONTÁÑEZ

[1194]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE LA REINA D.ª MARGARITA DE AUSTRIA

PORTRAIT DE LA REINE MARGUERITE D’AUTRICHE

PORTRAIT OF QUEEN MARGARET OF AUSTRIA

[1177]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DEL REY D. FELIPE III

PORTRAIT DU ROI PHILIPPE III

PORTRAIT OF PHILIP III

[1176]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE LA REINA D.ª ISABEL DE BORBÓN

PORTRAIT DE LA REINE ISABELLE DE BOURBON

PORTRAIT OF QUEEN ISABEL OF BOURBON

[1179]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DEL REY D. FELIPE IV

PORTRAIT DU ROI PHILIPPE IV

PORTRAIT OF PHILIP IV

[1178]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DEL PRÍNCIPE DON BALTASAR CARLOS

PORTRAIT DU PRINCE BALTHAZAR CARLOS

PORTRAIT OF PRINCE BALTHAZAR CHARLES

[1180]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DEL CONDE-DUQUE DE OLIVARES

PORTRAIT DU COMTE-DUC D’OLIVARES

PORTRAIT OF THE COUNT-DUKE OLIVARES

[1181]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DEL REY D. FELIPE IV. EN TRAJE DE CAZA

PORTRAIT DU ROI PHILIPPE IV EN COSTUME DE CHASSE

PORTRAIT OF PHILIP IV IN HUNTING COSTUME

[1184]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DEL INFANTE D. FERNANDO DE AUSTRIA

PORTRAIT DE L’INFANT FERDINAND D’AUTRICHE

PORTRAIT OF THE INFANTE FERDINAND OF AUSTRIA

1186]

[Illustration: RETRATO DEL PRÍNCIPE DON BALTASAR CARLOS

PORTRAIT DU PRINCE BALTHAZAR CARLOS

PORTRAIT OF PRINCE BALTHAZAR CARLOS

[1189]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE UN ENANO DEL REY FELIPE IV, LLAMADO «EL PRIMO»

PORTRAIT D’UN NAIN DU ROI PHILIPPE IV, DIT «EL PRIMO»

PORTRAIT OF A DWARF OF KING PHILIP IV, SURNAMED «EL PRIMO»

[1201]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE UN ENANO DEL REY FELIPE IV

PORTRAIT D’UN NAIN DU ROI PHILIPPE IV

PORTRAIT OF A DWARF OF PHILIP IV

[1202]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE UN ENANO DEL REY FELIPE IV

PORTRAIT D’UN NAIN DU ROI PHILIPPE IV

PORTRAIT OF A DWARF OF PHILIP IV

[1203]]

[Illustration: EL NIÑO DE VALLECAS

L’ENFANT DE VALLECAS

THE CHILD OF VALLECAS

[1204]]

[Illustration: EL BOBO DE CORIA

L’IDIOT DE CORIA

THE FOOL OF CORIA

[1205]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE UN TRUHÁN DEL REY FELIPE IV

PORTRAIT D’UN BOUFFON DU ROI PHILIPPE IV

PORTRAIT OF ONE OF PHILIP IV’S JESTERS

[1200]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE PERNÍA, BUFÓN DEL REY FELIPE IV

PORTRAIT DE PERNÍA, BOUFFON DU ROI PHILIPPE IV

PORTRAIT OF PERNÍA, BUFFOON OF PHILIP IV

[1199]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE D.ª MARÍA DE AUSTRIA

PORTRAIT DE D.ª MARÍA D’AUTRICHE

PORTRAIT OF MARY OF AUSTRIA

[1191]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE D.ª MARÍA DE AUSTRIA

PORTRAIT DE D.ª MARÍA D’AUTRICHE

PORTRAIT OF MARY OF AUSTRIA

[1190]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DE LA INFANTA D.ª MARÍA TERESA DE AUSTRIA

PORTRAIT DE L’INFANTE MARIE THÉRÈSE D’AUTRICHE

PORTRAIT OF THE INFANTA MARIA THERESA OF AUSTRIA

[1192]]

[Illustration: RETRATO DEL REY D. FELIPE IV

PORTRAIT DU ROI PHILIPPE IV

PORTRAIT OF PHILIP IV

[1185]]

[Illustration: EL DIOS MARTE

LE DIEU MARS

MARS

[1208]]

[Illustration: MERCURIO Y ARGOS

MERCURE ET ARGUS

MERCURY AND ARGUS

[1175]]

[Illustration: LA CORONACIÓN DE LA VIRGEN

LE COURONNEMENT DE LA VIERGE

THE CORONATION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN

[1168]]

[Illustration: ESOPO

ESOPE

AESOP

[1206]]

[Illustration: MENIPO

MÉNIPPE

MENIPPUS

[1207]]

[Illustration: LA FÁBRICA DE TAPICES DE SANTA ISABEL DE MADRID (LAS
HILANDERAS)

LA FABRIQUE DE TAPISSERIES DE SANTA ISABEL, À MADRID (LES FILEUSES)

THE TAPESTRY WORKS OF SAINT ISABEL AT MADRID. (THE SPINNERS)

[1173]]

[Illustration: LAS MENINAS (LA FAMILIA)

LES MÉNINES (LA FAMILLE)

THE LITTLE GIRLS (THE FAMILY)

[1174]]

[Illustration: LAS MENINAS (LA FAMILIA) (FRAGMENTO)

LES MÉNINES (LA FAMILLE) (DÉTAIL)

THE LITTLE GIRLS (THE FAMILY) (FRAGMENT)]

[Illustration: SAN ANTONIO ABAD VISITANDO A SAN PABLO

SAINT ANTOINE ABBÉ VISITANT SAINT PAUL ERMITE

THE ABBOT SAINT ANTHONY, VISITING SAINT PAUL

[1169]]

                   *       *       *       *       *

                           EL ARTE EN ESPAÑA

                      EDICIONES DE VULGARIZACIÓN


Propagar el conocimiento de los tesoros artísticos de nuestra patria, es
lo que nos mueve a publicar esta Biblioteca de vulgarización del Arte
nacional, que tiende, por lo económico de su precio, a que llegue a
todas las manos. Es tanto lo que aún poseemos, y tan importante, que es
de conveniencia que se sepa, por los que no lo tengan averiguado, que
nuestro país es todo él un museo, rico, variado, generoso para cuantos a
su estudio se dediquen. Para demostrarlo, y para que esta demostración
llegue fácilmente a todas partes, emprendemos la publicación de una
serie de tomitos en los cuales se recojerá, con abundancia de
reproducciones y acompañado de breve texto, lo más saliente de antiguas
construcciones seculares; de los pintores y escultores que gozan de
nombradía universal y de cuanto en los museos españoles dice el abolengo
de industrias artísticas nacionales.


                           Obras publicadas:

             1.--LA CATEDRAL DE BURGOS.
             2.--GUADALAJARA-ALCALA DE HENARES.
             3.--LA CASA DEL GRECO.
             4.--REAL PALACIO DE MADRID.
             5.--ALHAMBRA.
             6.--VELAZQUEZ EN EL MUSEO DEL PRADO.
             7.--SEVILLA.
             8.--ESCORIAL.
             9.--MONASTERIO DE GUADALUPE.
            10.--EL GRECO.
            11.--ARANJUEZ.
            12.--MONASTERIO DE POBLET.
            13.--CIUDAD RODRIGO.
            14.--GOYA EN EL MUSEO DEL PRADO.
            15.--LA CATEDRAL DE LEON.


                              En prensa:

                 PALENCIA  :  LA CATEDRAL DE SIGÜENZA


      Establecimiento editorial Thomas, Mallorca, 291, Barcelona

                   *       *       *       *       *


                                MVSEVM

                            REVISTA MENSUAL
                            DE ARTE ESPAÑOL
                        ANTIGUO Y MODERNO Y DE
                    LA VIDA ARTÍSTICA CONTEMPORANEA

[Illustration]

=MVSEVM= es la única revista puramente artística en lengua española, que
se publica en Europa y América; es la mejor publicación de arte que ve
la luz en los países de origen latino, según lo atestigua la prensa
competente de Europa; publica informaciones e investigaciones sobre
pintura, escultura, arquitectura, arqueología, cerámica, vidriería,
numismática, orfebrería, xilografía, tapices, bordados, decoración de
interiores, etc., etc. A quien quiera lo solicite manda números de
muestra.


PRECIOS DE SUSCRIPCIÓN

    España, un año.                     20 pesetas.
    Extranjero.                         25 francos.
    Número suelto.                       2 pesetas.
    Número suelto en el extranjero       2 fr. 50.


Administración: c. Mallorca, 291.--Barcelona--(España).

       *       *       *       *       *

                             _Reproducido,
                  grabado y estampado en los talleres
                         Thomas, de Barcelona_

[Illustration]

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VELÁZQUEZ EN EL MUSEO DEL PRADO ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
